---
layout: post
title:  "ZABBIX ' The Journey to Distributed System Monitoring '"
date:   2020-01-04 15:55:17 +0100
tags: programming python
comments: true
---

<script src="https://cdn.bokeh.org/bokeh/release/bokeh-2.1.0.min.js" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">window.PlotlyConfig = { MathJaxConfig: 'local' };</script>
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script>

## Exploring Zabbix

The new world of distributed systems present a great sense of reliability 
and features that require every component of an enterprise to be maintained 
in a Highly Available ( HA ) Cluster so that the minimum downtime can be ensured. 
This Architecture of maintaining all components in HA cluster presents a difficult 
task to track down all components physical as well as software level so that any 
issues can be tracked down before any mishappening occurs.

## Solution -- Here Comes Savior ZABBIX

One such solution to track down the components in such an environment might be ZABBIX. 
It is an enterprise-class open source distributed monitoring solution that helps to 
monitor various parameters of network health as well as the performance of servers. 
Also one can configure various alerts using ZABBIX these alerts can be SMS or might 
be E-Mail based alerts. It also provides a Dashboard where one can track down the 
status of network as well as the health of servers. Whereas it also provides data 
visualisation based on the stored data.


## Universe of Polling and Trapping

It supports both polling and trapping. In polling it simply polls the data out of 
the resources like switch and informs whenever any such failure occurs while this 
activity is being performed whereas in trapping it picks up any SNMP signal that 
is being sent to it and will inform about any such failure of the specified resource.

## Network / Logs

Various Servers as well as Network components can be configured and monitored using 
ZABBIX. It also provides log level monitoring and also has default templates for 
monitoring specific services like MYSQL etc. Using such a centralized monitoring 
system one ensure that your components work fine all day long and also provide with 
real time Graphs and Visualisations to identify appropriate failures in the system 
whenever required.

ZABBIX also provides with an API endpoint that can furthur be explored and get various 
different tasks automated. Like an API endpoint of Zabbix can be configured to let you 
know about all such servers and network components that failed to comunicate with the 
ZABBIX server in the past time.

## Data Gathering

Using ZABBIX one can achieve various results like Data Gathering, threshold 
values can be defined for various components like API response time and 
network response time etc and triggers can be set which provides flexible 
alert system for these components. Visualisation for data can be done in forms 
of graphs and charts. It also provides a web interface ( dashboard ) to monitor 
all such activities. It works using binary daemons written in C. 
So, It does not affect the performance of the system and is easily portable.

### Conclusion

Zabbix “ The Open Source Tool ” that opens door to various possibilities and 
features that you can use to ensure your system works with minimum downtime 
and also get visualisations of your performance matrices of the system.

